---
layout: post
color: "#BAD123"
textcolor: white
author: Calliope
---

# My Linux adventure, 2008 - *

## The first act - A bumbling newbie
I first stumbled upon Linux some 8 years ago, when a technology magazine my dad had a subscription for included a live CD for Ubuntu. I was quite unaware that anything other than Windows existed at the time and even when I did realise that Linux was an alternative, I just couldn't see its utility after installing it. It felt clunky, inelegant and mostly just lacked the ease of installing programs as compared to Windows. Not to mention that even with the graphical interface, it took me a few hours and an accidentally deleted partition before it was finally installed. Installing programs meant I sometimes had to use `dpkg` in the command line. I understood none of that at the time. To me, it became increasingly clear that Linux was not designed for a 10 year old and I quickly ~~backed out~~ gave up.

_image_

But I kept hearing about Linux on and off over the next few years and in 2014, decided to give it a whirl again. This time, I knew a little bit about what I was doing and installed it in almost no time. I mean, once you learn what the `/` and `/swap` partitions are, you don't really forget what they are or how to allocate them. On first boot, I was still quite impressed with the relative ease with which I was navigating the interface. But it took me all of 15 minutes to realise that I still didn't see the utility of using Linux. Sure, it was more intuitive than when I had used it years prior but there wasn't anything _new_ or _different_ that would compel me to switch over to using it full time. There was also the absolutely *hideous* orange UI that Unity, Ubuntu's default desktop environment, had. It took over my computer from the second I hit the power button to the time I shut it down. It was inescapable.

But over the next couple of months, I learned more about the command line and the Synaptic package manager. My father had taught me the very basics of using the Windows command line for folder navigation years prior so I had no negative stigma associated with using the terminal. But I was still not completely sold that Linux was the way to go. It was a painful, yet very fun experience until I thought otherwise. Over time, I definitely began enjoying the little advantages that Ubuntu brought to the table. Speed was a major aspect here. The boot-up time and general fluidity in Linux was unparallled and absolutely destroyed my Windows setup in comparison.

Because I was a self-proclaimed enthusiast, I couldn't stand how terribly slow **I** was by switching over Linux and how the machine sometimes responded in an unexpected wa. It was the little things that bugged me. For example, Some of the keyboard shortcuts I was used to didn't work by default, the mouse acceleration was impossible to control from the settings applet and there was still the aforementioned orange monstrosity of a user interface.

## The second act - The path to being a terminal warrior
When I realised that the performance gains were these huge on a default setup and that it could have easily been improved with a little bit of tinkering, excitement crept up. You see, I had been using an ancient machine that was only usable due to me micromanaging things like background services and startup programs under Windows. I knew the Windows way of doing these things, `msconfig` and group policies for example, but not their Linux equivalents. After struggling for a bit, I was capable of using `apt-get` and other basic system maintainence commands. 

But it quickly become apparent that I'd been approaching the problem wrong. There was no way I was ever going to be able to find all the _workarounds_ needed to be as comfortable as I had been in Windows. Instead, it had to be treated like a completely new system which also meant relearning a lot of things from scratch. It helped that it was around this time that I was also getting somewhat with programming. Python required extensive command line usage as did Git. So at this point I was determined to learn version control, a programming language and the command line. It was almost perfect how all these domains overlapped and it was only because they did that my comfort with all of them accelerated tenfold.

Now, enter 2015 and 2016: I finally understood Linux. It had finally clicked. Somehow, the terminal was what I had been missing all my life and I didn't even know it. The keyboard-first philosophy, verbosity of errors and the sheer simplicity, yet pure power that it placed in your hands was in one word, breathtaking. I began understanding first-hand the convenience of using the terminal for everyday tasks that would normally be done with a desktop. Bash scripting made batch operations trivial and moreover, fun and tab autocomplete meant that even though there was typing to be done, everything was still only a few keystrokes away. I didn't need to ever take either of my hands off the keyboard.

The best part? All my experience just carried over when I started off with the Raspberry Pi. It wasn't a hostile environment at all. After accessing it via SSH, it was as if it were my own computer's command line. Using SSH was simple and unlike Windows, I didn't even need to install something like Putty to control my Raspberry Pi remotely, which ran Debian.

So I began loving Linux and it was around this time that it was starting to become an obsession. There was always something new to learn and even the simplest differences, like the one between `/usr/bin` vs `/usr/sbin` had tons of years worth of history behind them. I wanted to learn more about the way the system worked though and I discovered, through Reddit, that Arch Linux was the best way to do this. The comment that advocated for Arch trailed off with some variation of the words, _but it's not for the faint of heart_. I still don't know if I jumped on the idea as fast as I did because that comment posed an idea of elitism or because it seemed like a challenge but I was hooked. That was October of 2016, a few months ago.

## The third act - Breaking a Linux install, repeatedly
I downloaded Arch without knowing much about it. I was aware that it came with only the bare skeleton of an operating system and nothing else. Installing an X server, window manager, getting my trackpad working, everything needed to be done manually. The prospect of this task was arduous, I couldn't even imagine how I would manage to get all of these things working despite having a rough idea of how they worked. I dived in nevertheless and that was one of the best decisions I ever made. I'm a little prouder than I should be of all the effort I put into making that system _mine_ but I can't help it. It's thrilling.

But I didn't just magically end up with a fully configured Linux install overnight. It took me multiple embarrassing tries. I glossed over the part where I had to install `iw, wpa_supplicant and dialog` and didn't have working Wi-Fi so I reinstalled. I broke my Xorg because, as I later found out, I added a stray line of chracters `...` in a Synaptics config file and ended up reinstalling. I decided that I wanted to use ReFind as my bootloader instead of GRUB and so I reinstalled. These were only a small number of the actual mistakes I made. I was somewhat aware that I could have just used chroot from the live media to fix them but I decided to reinstall each time anyway. In return, partly because of plain ol' repetition, understanding how Linux worked went from being a distant dream to something that was actually possible.

There were about half a million things I fell in love with in Arch over stock Ubuntu but that's outside the scope of this discussion. The part that immediately stood out to me though, was the ability to customize my entire installation from scratch.
